Cyclistic Bike-Share Case Study

Scenario

In this case study, I will perform as junior data analyst working on the marketing team at a fictional company called Cyclistic, a bike-share company located in Chicago that features more than 5,800 bicycles and 600 docking stations. The company offers reclining bikes, hand tricycles, and cargo bikes for everyone including people with disabilities who can't ride a standard two-wheeled bike. Most of the riders opt for traditional bikes, and about 8% of the riders use the assistive options. Cyclistic users are more likely to ride for leisure, but about 30% use bikes to commute to work each day. In 2016, the company launched a successful bike-share offering that has grown to a fleet of 5,824 bicycles that are geotracked and locked into a network of 692 stations across Chicago. The bikes can be unlocked from one station and returned to any other station in the system anytime. The company has three segments of pricing plans: single-ride passes, full-day passes, and annual memberships. Customers who purchase single-ride or full-day passes are referred to as casual riders. Customers who purchase annual memberships are Cyclistic members. Cyclistic users are more likely to ride for leisure, but about 30% use bikes to commute to work each day.

Cyclistic’s finance analysts have concluded that annual members are much more profitable than casual riders. Although the pricing flexibility helps Cyclistic attract more customers, Lily Moreno (Marketing department director and my manager) believes that maximizing the number of annual members will be key to future growth. Rather than creating a marketing campaign that targets all-new customers, Moreno believes there is a solid opportunity to convert casual riders into members. She notes that casual riders are already aware of the Cyclistic program and have chosen Cyclistic for their mobility needs.

Moreno has set a clear goal: Design marketing strategies aimed at converting casual riders into annual members. To do that, the team needs to better understand how annual members and casual riders differ, why casual riders would buy a membership, and how digital media could affect their marketing tactics. Moreno and her team are interested in analyzing the Cyclistic historical bike trip data to identify trends. From these insights, my team will design a new marketing strategy to convert casual riders into annual members. But first, Cyclistic executives must approve my recommendations, so they must be backed up with compelling data insights and professional data visualizations.

To answer the business questions, I'll follow the steps of the data analysis process: Ask, Prepare, Process, Analyze, Share, and Act.

1.     Ask

Business Task: Design marketing strategies to convert casual riders into annual members. To do that, the team needs to better understand how annual members and casual riders differ, why casual riders would buy a membership, and how digital media could affect their marketing tactics. It was assigned to me the first question to answer: How do annual members and casual riders use Cyclistic bikes differently?

2.     Prepare

Data Source: I will use public trip data to analyze, explore and identify trends in how different customer types are using Cyclistic bikes. They can be downloaded here and have been made available by Motivate International Inc. under this license. For this case study, I will use 12 csv files from the past 12 months (July 2023 to June 2024) from the date I downloaded (July 23, 2024).

Data Organization: Each file contains one month's worth of information and is structured into rows (records) and columns (fields). Each record represents one trip, which is identified by a unique field called ride_id. Each file has the following columns: ride_id, bike_type, start_time, end_time, start_station, end_station, start_location, and member_casual. It is important to note that due to data-privacy concerns, we are unable to use riders' personally identifiable information, which means we cannot link pass purchases to credit card numbers to determine whether casual riders live in the Cyclistic service area or have purchased multiple individual passes.

Data Integrity and Reliability:  The ROCCC test is used to assess the integrity and reliability of the data.

a)    Reliable: The data is correct, complete, unbiased, and representative of the population.

b)    Original: The data is publicly available and easily accessible.

c)     Comprehensive: It provides all the key information required to complete the task.

d)    Current: We are using data from the last 12 months.

e)    Cited: It is from a reliable and trustworthy source.

 

3.     Process

Data Merging: After downloading and unzipping all 12 zip files, I arranged them into folders and subfolders using proper naming conventions and converted the formatting of each.csv file to.xlsx so that we could have an original copy of the data. To continue processing the data, I used SQL Server Management Studio (SSMS) to upload all 12.csv files by creating tables for each of them, and then aggregated all 12 tables to create a uniform dataset due to the enormous volume of data. Another table called Cyclistic_Merged was generated, with a total of 5,734,381 records.

A screenshot of a computer

Description automatically generated

 

 

 

 

Data Cleaning: We generated another table called Cyclistic_Merged_Cleaned to proceed with the cleansing process.

A screenshot of a computer

Description automatically generated

a)    Validation of data types across all columns

A screenshot of a computer

Description automatically generated

b)    Validation of duplicate rows: There are no duplicated rows, although repeated ride_id can be found.

A screenshot of a computer program

Description automatically generated

c)     Validation for null values. The start_station_name, start_station_id, and end_station_name columns had null values (1,460,034 in total). Those null rows were eliminated, leaving 4,274,347 rows.

A screenshot of a computer program

Description automatically generated

A screenshot of a computer program

Description automatically generated

d)    Values standardization: After cleaning the data, I added some more variables that will be useful when I begin analyzing it. I generated and added the following columns to my table:

·       day_of_week: the day of the week in numeric format which the bike trip started

·       month_of_ride: the month in numeric format in which the ride started

·       year_of_ride: the year in numeric format in which the ride started

·       name_day_of_ride: the day of the week in text format which the bike trip started

·       name_month_of_ride: the month in text format in which the ride started



A computer screen shot of a program

Description automatically generated

4.     Analyze and Share

We analyzed the data to find meaningful trends and relationships from which we might draw insights.

a) Trips per Type of Bicycles Used

Cyclistic offers a range of bicycle types (classic, electric, and docked). Looking at the data, I can identify certain patterns about annual and casual riders when it comes to bicycle preferences.

·       Annual members preferred classic bikes to electric bikes. Classic bikes were used for approximately 1.8 million trips, compared to 0.88 million rides on electric cycles.

·       Casual riders preferred classic bikes to the other two selections. About 0.95 million trips were taken on classic bikes, 0.51 million on electric bikes, and less than 0.33 million on docked bikes.

A screenshot of a chart

Description automatically generated

b) Trips Taken by the Hour

·       Annual members used Cyclistic bikes most frequently at 5 PM (301,298 trips, 7.05%) and least at 3 AM (4,497 trips, 0.11%).

·       Casual riders utilized the Cyclistic bike the most at 5 PM (146,142 trips, 3.42%) and the least at 4 AM (3,408 trips, 0.08%).

A graph with numbers and lines

Description automatically generated

 

c) Trips Taken by the Day of the Week

·       Annual bike-share program usage was highest on Wednesday (447,981 trips, 10.48%) and lowest on Sunday (313,787 trips, 7.34%).

·       Casual users used the bike-share program more on Saturday (311,498 trips, 7.29%) and less on Tuesday (173,175 trips, 4.06%).

 

A graph of a trip day of week

Description automatically generated

d) Trips Taken by the Month

·       Seasonally, we can see that both groups had a peak trips during the Summer, meanwhile in the Winter we verified that were the months with less trips.

·       Annual members made the most bike trips (351,023) in August 2023 (8.21), and the fewest (96,095) in January 2024 (2.25%).

·       Casual riders made the most bike trips (245,294) in July 2023 (5.75%), and the fewest (17,713) in January 2024 (0.41%).

·       Both groups experienced peak excursions throughout the summer, while the winter months had less trips.

A graph with numbers and lines

Description automatically generated

e) Trips per Bike Stations and Locations

·       The most common starting and ending stations for annual members were Clinton St & Washington Blvd (25,516 and 26,257 trips, respectively), followed by Kingsbury St & Kinzie St (24,743 and 24,770 trips) and Clark St & Elm St (22,724 trips) for starting station and Michigan Ave & Oak St (23,002 trips) for ending station.

·       For casual riders, Streeter Dr & Grand Ave was the most common starting and ending station (45,092 and 48,927 trips, respectively), following by DuSable Lake Shore Dr & Monroe St (30,615 and 28,317 trips) and Michigan Ave & Oak St (21,840 and 23,002 trips).

A screenshot of a map

Description automatically generated

f) Trips per Average in Minutes

·       Annual members had the most average ride minutes on Sundays and July 2023, August 2023, May 2024, and June 2024, while Mondays, Thursdays, and December 2023 had the lowest average.

·       Casual riders reported the highest average ride minutes on Sunday and in May 2024, while Wednesday, Thursday, and January 2024 had the lowest average ride minutes.

 

A graph of a bicycle ride

Description automatically generated with medium confidence

5.     Act

After demonstrating all the analysis and explaining how annual members and casual riders use Cyclistic bikes differently, it is time to suggest ways for converting casual riders into annual members.
Recommendation: Implement a new annual membership option that considers a cost-effective pricing model (monthly and annual plans), offering discounts and promotions to only members, and collaborate with local businesses (especially during the summer season and weekends) to attract casual riders to subscribe.

 
